---
title: Light
module: 13
jotted: true
---

# Make Light Work

<a href="https://umontana.zoom.us/rec/play/vsB-IeD6qmk3GYHH4QSDBPZ-W460K6yshHdM8vsJyx3nVnQCOlujYOYbauNBb5Jw8nhZyjvqINCkWeOM?autoplay=true&startTime=1585681050000">Video</a>

Light is important because it can make or break how your video turns out. If it's too dark, you might not be able to see the subjects.  Also, if it's too bright, you might lose detail.  So, use light to your advantage, which takes experimentation.

What kinds of light are there?

1. **Flat light**
When you have your light source facing directly at the front of your subject, this is flat lighting. Flat lighting on a face will mean that your subject is well lit, and you are unable to see any shadows along their face.

2. **Broad light**
With broad light (a type of side lighting), the face of your subject is at an angle, and the most well-lit side of the face is closest to the camera, and the shadow falls on the backside of the face. This type of light can make a face look fuller, so it's ideal for those with very narrow faces.

3. **Short light**
Another type of side lighting, short light, is the opposite of broad light in that the face is at an angle, and the shadow falls on the side of the face closest to the camera. This type of light works well to thin a face and is flattering on most people.

4. **Split light**
Split lighting is another type of side lighting, but the light that hits your subject from the side at a 90-degree angle.

5. **Backlight**
Backlight is just that, light that comes from behind your subject. This type of lighting is most commonly seen in photos from the beloved golden hour when the sun is low on the horizon and starting to set, but done at all hours of the day.

6. **Rim light**
Rim light falls under the backlight category but deserves a spot of its own. With backlight, you often see the hazy or airiness from the light in the background resulting in highlights, but you don't have that with rim light.

7. **Butterfly light**
With butterfly light, the light is placed above and in front of your subject to create a small shadow under the nose resembling a butterfly (hence the name). This type of light beautifully highlights prominent cheekbones, which is why you most often see it used on women.

8. **Loop light**
Loop lighting is pretty much my go-to when creating light. With loop lighting, the light is about 45 degrees to the side and slightly above eye level.

Source [ClickinMoms](https://www.clickinmoms.com/blog/types-photography-lighting/)
