---
title: Events
module: 2
jotted: true
---

## Events

Events are what create interactivity and, in many ways, Solar2D is an event-based framework where information is dispatched during a specific event to an event listener. Whether that event is the user touching an object/button, tapping the screen, or (in this game) tapping the balloon, Solar2D can react by triggering an event.

Adding an event listener is easy — do so now, following the function:

```lua
local function pushBalloon()
    balloon:applyLinearImpulse( 0, -0.75, balloon.x, balloon.y )
end
 
balloon:addEventListener( "tap", pushBalloon )
```

Let's inspect the structure of this new command:

First, we must tell Solar2D which object is involved in the event listener. For this game, we want to detect an event related directly to the balloon object.

Immediately following this, add a colon (:), then addEventListener. In Lua, this is called an object method. Essentially, addEventListener, following the colon, tells Solar2D that we want to add an event listener to balloon, specified before the colon.

Inside the parentheses are two parameters which complete the command. The first parameter is the event type which Solar2D will listen for, in this case "tap". The second parameter is the function which should be run (called) when the event occurs, in this case the pushBalloon() function which we wrote in the previous section. Essentially, we're telling Solar2D to run the pushBalloon() function every time the user taps the balloon.

That is everything — you have a functional game now! If you save your main.lua file and relaunch the Simulator, it should be ready to go. Try your best to continue tapping/clicking the balloon and preventing it from touching the platform!

Here is the complete program, just in case you missed something:

```lua
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--
-- main.lua
--
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
local background = display.newImageRect( "background.png", 360, 570 )
background.x = display.contentCenterX
background.y = display.contentCenterY
 
local platform = display.newImageRect( "platform.png", 300, 50 )
platform.x = display.contentCenterX
platform.y = display.contentHeight-25
 
local balloon = display.newImageRect( "balloon.png", 112, 112 )
balloon.x = display.contentCenterX
balloon.y = display.contentCenterY
balloon.alpha = 0.8
 
local physics = require( "physics" )
physics.start()
 
physics.addBody( platform, "static" )
physics.addBody( balloon, "dynamic", { radius=50, bounce=0.3 } )
 
local function pushBalloon()
    balloon:applyLinearImpulse( 0, -0.75, balloon.x, balloon.y )
end
 
balloon:addEventListener( "tap", pushBalloon )
```
