---
title: Firing Mechanics
module: 3
jotted: true
---

# Firing Mechanics

What is a shooting game without shooting?

Getting our ship to fire lasers is similar to loading asteroids, but this time we'll use a convenient and powerful method to move them known as a transition. Essentially, a transition is an animation method which allows you to change the "state" of an object across a defined amount of time — this can include the position, scale, rotation, opacity, and more. You can even perform multiple transition effects in one line and specify an "easing" algorithm to make the transition run with non-linear interpolation.

We'll discuss transitions more in a bit. First, let's add the function that will create a new laser object:

```lua
    newAsteroid:applyTorque( math.random( -6,6 ) )
end
 
 
local function fireLaser()
 
    local newLaser = display.newImageRect( mainGroup, objectSheet, 5, 14, 40 )
    physics.addBody( newLaser, "dynamic", { isSensor=true } )
    newLaser.isBullet = true
    newLaser.myName = "laser"
end
```

Most of this code should be straightforward:

We create a new laser object inside the mainGroup display group, using 5 for the frame number since the laser is the 5th frame in our image sheet configuration.

We add it to the physics engine as a sensor type object (isSensor=true).

We indicate that the laser should be treated as a "bullet" by setting its isBullet property to true. This makes the object subject to continuous collision detection rather than periodic collision detection at world time steps. Because our laser will be moving very quickly across the screen, this will help ensure that it doesn't "pass through" any asteroids without registering a collision.

Finally, we assign the object a myName property of "laser" which, similar to the ship and asteroids, will be useful when detecting collisions.

### Placement
The new laser object is now loaded, but we haven't yet positioned it correctly. In this case, we can't use a static position because the ship will eventually be moving left and right via the player's control. Fortunately, it's very easy to position the new laser at the exact same place as the ship by setting its x and y values to the ship's x and y values:

```lua
local function fireLaser()
 
    local newLaser = display.newImageRect( mainGroup, objectSheet, 5, 14, 40 )
    physics.addBody( newLaser, "dynamic", { isSensor=true } )
    newLaser.isBullet = true
    newLaser.myName = "laser"
 
    newLaser.x = ship.x
    newLaser.y = ship.y
end
```

This will correctly position the laser horizontally and vertically, but there's one further issue to resolve. Because this function creates new lasers after the ship has already been loaded, and both objects are part of the mainGroup display group, lasers will appear visually above (in front of) the ship in terms of layering. Clearly this looks silly, so let's push it behind the ship with the following highlighted command:

```lua
    newLaser.x = ship.x
    newLaser.y = ship.y
    newLaser:toBack()
end
```

The object:toBack() command sends an object to the very back of its own display group, but that's not necessarily the very back of the entire parent stage group. The above command will send the laser object to the back of its display group (mainGroup), but it will still appear in front of the background image contained within backGroup.

### Movement
As mentioned earlier, we'll move the laser up the screen using a transition. Most transitions are performed with the transition.to() command. In its most simple form, this command accepts an object reference, such as the laser, and a table of parameters to change over a specified time.

Add the following highlighted line to the fireLaser() function:

```lua
    newLaser.x = ship.x
    newLaser.y = ship.y
    newLaser:toBack()
 
    transition.to( newLaser, { y=-40, time=500, } )
end
```

As you can see, the first parameter is the object to transition (newLaser). For the second parameter, we include a table which can contain various properties for the transition. Here, we set y=-40 which indicates the laser's vertical destination, slightly off the top edge of the screen. We also set a custom time parameter of 500. For transitions, the time (duration) should always be specified in milliseconds — remember that 1 second equals 1000 milliseconds, so this transition will occur over a duration of ½ second.

### Cleanup

Great! New lasers will now correctly appear at the same location as the ship (visually behind it too) and move upward across the screen. There is just one last thing to implement, and it's very important: cleanup. In any app, it's critical that you remove objects from the game which are no longer needed. If you don't, the app will eventually slow to a crawl, run out of memory, and crash — not a good experience for the player!

There are various approaches toward cleanup and it will depend on the situation. For the lasers, we're going to use a very convenient method known as an onComplete callback. Available as an option within transition.to() and several other commands, this tells Solar2D that you want to call a function when something "completes." This is ideal for removing lasers which have completed their transition, so let's expand our transition.to() command to include an onComplete callback:

```lua
    newLaser.x = ship.x
    newLaser.y = ship.y
    newLaser:toBack()
 
    transition.to( newLaser, { y=-40, time=500,
        onComplete = function() display.remove( newLaser ) end
    } )
end
```

Simply stated, this addition runs a function when the transition completes. Inside the function, the only command we need is display.remove( newLaser ) which removes the laser object from the stage. Beyond that, Lua's built-in garbage collection process will automatically free up memory that was allocated to the object.

Those with a keen eye will notice that the function specified after onComplete = doesn't have a name. In Lua, this is known as an anonymous function. These are useful as "temporary" functions, for functions needed as a parameter to another function, etc. Although we could write a dedicated function to remove the lasers and call it via the onComplete callback, it's easier to use an anonymous function in this case.

### Tap Listener
We're almost done with the firing mechanics — let's finish up by assigning the ship a "tap" event listener so that the player can actually fire lasers. Immediately following the fireLaser() function (after its closing end statement), add the following command:

```lua
    transition.to( newLaser, { y=-40, time=500,
        onComplete = function() display.remove( newLaser ) end
    } )
end
 
ship:addEventListener( "tap", fireLaser )
```

Let's check the result of our code. Save your modified main.lua file, relaunch the Simulator, and try tapping/clicking on the ship to see how it fires lasers. Now we're getting somewhere!