---
title: Load Ship
module: 3
jotted: true
---

# Load Ship

As mentioned earlier, image sheets can be used as a source for an animated sequence of images (sprite) or they can be used to organize a collection of static images that will be used within your app. For this project, we'll use the second method.

Loading an individual image from an image sheet is similar to loading it from a file. Instead of supplying an image name, however, we specify a reference to the image sheet along with a frame number. Add the following highlighted line to your project code:

```lua
local backGroup = display.newGroup()
local background = display.newImageRect( "background.png", 800, 1400 )
background.x = display.contentCenterX
background.y = display.contentCenterY
 
ship = display.newImageRect( mainGroup, objectSheet, 4, 98, 79 )

backGroup:insert(ship)
```

Let's inspect this command in more detail:

The first parameter specifies the display group that the object will be placed (mainGroup). (not simply on the stage).

The second parameter is the reference to the image sheet we loaded earlier (objectSheet).

Since the ship is the 4th frame in our image sheet configuration, we specify 4 as the frame number (third parameter).

Finally, as usual, we set the width and height to 98 and 79, matching the frame's width and height values in the image sheet configuration.

Remember that we declared a forward reference for the ship object earlier in the program:

```lua
local ship
local gameLoopTimer
local livesText
```

Because of this, we don't need to preface the new ship = display.newImageRect() command with local. Essentially, we are now just setting the ship variable declared earlier to an actual value (an image object).

Let's continue configuring the ship with the following highlighted commands:

```lua
local mainGroup = display.newGroup()
ship = display.newImageRect( objectSheet, 4, 98, 79 )
ship.x = display.contentCenterX
ship.y = display.contentHeight - 100
physics.addBody( ship, { radius=30, isSensor=true } )
ship.myName = "ship"
mainGroup:insert(ship)
```

With the first two commands, we position the ship at the bottom-center of the screen. You'll recognize display.contentCenterX from the previous chapter, but this time we utilize a new command, display.contentHeight. This convenient property indicates the maximum y coordinate of the content area (bottom edge of the screen). Since the ship should be positioned slightly above this point, however, we subtract 100 from this value.

Next, we add the ship to the physics engine with a radius property of 30. In addition, we specify an important property: isSensor=true. This specifies that the object should be a sensor object. Essentially, sensor objects detect collisions with other physical objects but they do not produce a physical response. For example, if a normal body collides with a sensor body, the two bodies will not bounce off each other or cause any other physical reaction. This is ideal for our ship object, because we only want it to detect collisions with asteroids, not bounce off them.

Lastly, we give the ship object a myName property of "ship". This property will be used later to help determine what types of collisions are happening in the game.

### Note

Although the ship image clearly isn't circular, we added a circular physics body (radius=30) to the ship object. For this game, we're just being somewhat "lazy" by using this approximate body shape — once you get more comfortable with Solar2D, you'll learn how to add a perfect shape-based physics body to the ship which accurately matches the ship image's outline.