---
title: Game Loop
module: 3
jotted: true
---

# Game Loop

Many games include some type of game loop to handle the updating of information, checking/updating the state of game objects, etc. Although it's entirely possible to build a game in Solar2D without ever implementing a game loop, we'll use one here to illustrate the concept.

A game loop function is usually short — instead of containing a large amount of code itself, it typically calls other functions to handle specific repetitive functionality. Our game loop will be used to create new asteroids and clean up "dead" asteroids.

First, create the core game loop function in your main.lua file following the code you've already written:

```lua
ship:addEventListener( "touch", dragShip )
 
 
local function gameLoop()
 
 
end
```

Now add the following lines to simply call the createAsteroid() function that we wrote earlier in this chapter. Effectively, each time the game loop iterates, it'll generate a new asteroid.

```lua
local function gameLoop()
 
    -- Create new asteroid
    createAsteroid()
end
```

### Asteroid Cleanup

For this game, let's remove asteroids which have drifted off screen by looping through the asteroidsTable table. Remember when we declared this table as a place to store a reference for each asteroid? It may not have seemed relevant at the time, but now it's coming fully into play!

To loop through the table, we'll use a Lua for loop. Essentially, a for loop lets us use an index variable to count either up or down from a starting number to an ending number.

Add the following highlighted commands to your gameLoop() function:

```lua
local function gameLoop()
 
    -- Create new asteroid
    createAsteroid()
 
    -- Remove asteroids which have drifted off screen
    for i = #asteroidsTable, 1, -1 do
 
    end
end
```

Notice that Lua for loops, similar to functions and conditional statements, conclude with the familiar end command.

In this case, we need to count down (decrement) starting from the number of asteroids in the asteroidsTable table, but there's one slight catch: the amount will constantly change as new asteroids are created and others are destroyed by the player. Fortunately, Lua has a convenient way to count the number of elements in a table, accomplished by simply prefacing the table name with #:

```lua
#asteroidsTable
```

As you can see, we use this method in our for loop which takes the indicated form — basically, Lua uses the index i, starts at #asteroidsTable, stops at 1, and counts by -1 (decrements).

Inside the for loop, we must include code which should be processed each time the loop iterates. If there are ten asteroids in the table, the loop will iterate ten times. If there's just one asteroid in the table, it will iterate once.

Add the following highlighted lines inside the for loop:

```lua
    -- Remove asteroids which have drifted off screen
    for i = #asteroidsTable, 1, -1 do
        local thisAsteroid = asteroidsTable[i]
 
        if ( thisAsteroid.x < -100 or
             thisAsteroid.x > display.contentWidth + 100 or
             thisAsteroid.y < -100 or
             thisAsteroid.y > display.contentHeight + 100 )
        then
            display.remove( thisAsteroid )
            table.remove( asteroidsTable, i )
        end
    end
end
```

Let's examine these commands in more detail:

For each iteration of the loop, we first declare a local reference to the asteroid which the loop is referencing on that particular iteration:
local thisAsteroid = asteroidsTable[i]
Essentially, thisAsteroid is set to the table item at the index number within the brackets ([]), so by using the for loop's index of i, we easily gain a reference to each asteroid in the table as the loop iterates from start to finish.

The next block is a multi-conditional statement which checks the position of the asteroid being referenced during the loop iteration. Basically, with this statement, we check if the asteroid has drifted substantially far off any edge of the screen by checking its x and y properties:

```lua
if ( thisAsteroid.x < -100 or
    thisAsteroid.x > display.contentWidth + 100 or
    thisAsteroid.y < -100 or
    thisAsteroid.y > display.contentHeight + 100 )
then
```

If any of the four conditions are met, we perform two important actions:
First, we remove the asteroid from the screen using the display.remove() command:

**display.remove( thisAsteroid )**
Second, we remove the asteroid from the asteroidsTable table with the built-in Lua table.remove() command. This command simply removes an item from a table at the specified index, in this case the loop index of i:

**table.remove( asteroidsTable, i )**
It's very important to understand basic Lua memory management and how it relates to display objects. The first command above, display.remove( thisAsteroid ), will remove the asteroid from the screen, visually. However, that command alone will not release the asteroid from Lua memory. Why?

Because we stored an additional reference to the asteroid inside the asteroidsTable table, Lua cannot free up the memory allocated to the asteroid object until that reference is removed. That's why we perform the second command, table.remove( asteroidsTable, i ), directly afterward. This effectively removes that additional reference and, because there are no other persistent references to the object, the Lua garbage collection process can then automatically free its allocated memory.

That concludes our asteroid cleanup! Basically, on each iteration of the game loop, we use the for loop to check for asteroids which have drifted substantially outside of the screen bounds. Each of those "dead" asteroids is then removed from the screen and removed from the asteroidsTable storage table, keeping the total asteroid count down and memory usage low.

### Loop Timer
Although you might imagine a game loop as code/functionality which updates on every frame of the application runtime — up to 60 times per second — that's not necessarily true for every app. Because our game loop is a standard function, we have complete control over how often it runs, and when.

There are a couple different ways to run a game loop function repeatedly. In this game, we clearly don't want to generate 60 new asteroids per second, and it's not necessary to perform cleanup tasks that often either. So, we'll implement a repeating timer instead.

Immediately following the gameLoop() function (after its closing end statement), add the following command:

```lua
            display.remove( thisAsteroid )
            table.remove( asteroidsTable, i )
        end
    end
end
 
gameLoopTimer = timer.performWithDelay( 500, gameLoop, 0 )
```

Let's dissect this line:

First, we state that the gameLoopTimer placeholder variable (declared earlier) will be associated with our timer. This allows us to use that variable as a reference/handle for pausing or canceling the timer later, if necessary.

Next, we call timer.performWithDelay(). This convenient command tells Solar2D to perform some action after a specified number of milliseconds. Timers are useful for a wide array of game functionality, so get comfortable with them!

Inside the parentheses, we start with the number of milliseconds to wait (delay) until the timer fires. Here we use 500 which is exactly half a second, but you can experiment with other values. A lower number like 250 will make asteroids spawn faster and increase the difficulty of the game, but don't set this value too low or asteroids will generate too quickly and crowd the screen.

The next parameter is the function which will be called/run when the timer fires. Obviously we specify gameLoop here.

Finally, we include the optional iterations parameter with a value of 0. If this parameter is omitted, timers will simply fire once and stop. If you include this parameter, the timer will repeat for that number of iterations, but don't be fooled by the 0 in this case — we are not telling the timer to "run zero times" but rather to repeat forever. Basically, passing 0 or -1 will cause the timer to repeat indefinitely (unless we tell it to pause/stop).

All done! The game loop is complete and we have a timer in place to run it repeatedly and indefinitely. Save your modified main.lua file, relaunch the Simulator, and you should see new asteroids beginning to appear, steadily drifting and rotating across the screen. Our game is really coming to life now!