---
title: Testing
module: 6
jotted: true
---

# Testing

Augmented reality software testing is far more time-consuming and less consistent than traditional testing. 

It is important to set up correct environments and test the app with different physical objects, in different scenes under different lighting. It fits well within the traditional testing pyramid:

1. User Interface
2. Integration
3. Unit Testing

However, there are additional specifics that we believe you should know.

The environment might not be limited to rooms and lighting. 

When it comes to mobile AR apps, we always consider specific checklists for testing: 

1. Proper work of different screen orientations
2. Internet connection and its interruptions
3. Different levels of memory
4. Battery consumption.

Because of the diversity of AR-supporting smartphones, tablets, and AR headsets, testing on all devices listed in the product requirements is essential. Emulators obviously cannot substitute real devices when it comes to finding and eliminating possible issues within real physical environments.

## Scanning the environment

Detect all meshes, including physical objects and surfaces, under different spaces, angles, distances, motion and lighting conditions, and levels of ambient noise.

## Placing objects

Follow scanning by making sure that the placed digital objects (holograms) moves quickly and smoothly. Check how items interact with surfaces: for example, whether they would “fall” into surfaces, or they could be “hidden” behind such objects as walls or ceilings.


## Controlling an object

It is critical to make sure that the user can access the model menu at any time, under any conditions, regardless of the size and location of the model. 

It was also important to ensure adequate distance between the model and the menu. 

The user should be able to hit the buttons and catch them to control the model from the first or second try. 

It is worth noting that this approach to interaction is quite novel for people. That is why it is vital to make the overall experience of any augmented reality app easy and convenient for anyone.

It should be possible to move the model without any additional gestures simply using gaze, if this condition is mentioned in the product requirements.

## Controlling several objects simultaneously

It sometimes happens that the user is launching several similar holograms, and then launches an animation (say, rotation effect) for one hologram, other holograms start to rotate as well.


## Making crashes visible

There are no visible messages about the system crash often. This issue should always be discussed before the development starts. In our case, crashes were made visible to the user, so that they would be able to relaunch the application.

## Performing accessibility testing

Immersion in an augmented reality app sounds great in theory, yet it comes with health impacts and keeps causing headaches, eye strain, and motion sickness. Modern headsets are continuously perfected; however, it is up to the software team to create a product that can be used regardless of age and physical condition, reduce discomfort, and ensure quick and natural navigation. This must be kept in mind from the very start of the project and reflected in requirements and the actual code.

Take 10 mins to create a test plan based on your app test it.


