---
title: Course Introduction
module: 1
---

# Week 1<br />Welcome to Mobile Game Programming<br />(MART 462)

## Overview of the Course

This class is designed to cover several topics in mobile application programming.  


#### Objectives

Upon completing this course, a student will be able to: 

Explain the fundamental concepts that are essential to mobile application development, including but not limited to:

* Leverage game design techniques to implement a mobile application on Android and iOS
* Integrate specific assets effectively into a mobile application
* Work with a diverse project team
* Implement a mobile application using Java, Swift, Xamarin and Unity
* Generate and apply test plans for a mobile application
* Deploy a mobile application to the store



## What to Expect

This course will force you to learn and adapt to new technologies, while also thinking about design, and content creation. Some weeks will lean more technical in nature, while others will lean more creative-based.

Just as the content focus will shift, so to will the work amount. Some weeks, especially those when new topics are being introduced, have a heavier workload. The goal of this is to make you practice with these new technologies and techniques. Other weeks will slow down and allow you to practice at a more exploratory pace.

You should plan;

- 3 hours a week to work through the course website content (what you are doing now).
- 3-9 hours a week to work on concepts, code assignments, studying, and practicing.

## Class Goals

There are 4 high-level goals for this course;

1. Learn how to problem solve. (More specifically, how to break a problem down into sub-problems that are easier to solve by themselves)
2. Adapt to constantly changing technological paradigms by learning how to learn. (Skills acquisition.)
3. Combine technical and artistic practices through inquiry and iteration.
4. Adopt and use professional practices.


# Overview the Rest of This Week

The rest of this week will introduce the following;

- Information about instructors
- Syllabus
- Review;
    - GitHub accounts
    - issues forum
    - Creating a new GitHub Repo
- Go over how to submit homework.
- Introduction to GUI mobile applications
- Introduction to Class project
